Data File Format for AMMISOFT



	The Additive Main effects and Multiplicative Interaction (AMMI) 
model uses analysis of variance for the additive or main effects followed 
by principal components analysis for the multiplicative or interaction 
effects.  The data structure that AMMI addresses is a two-way factorial 
design, with or without replication.  In agricultural research, the 
principal application is yield trials which have a number of genotypes 
tested in a number of environments, often with replication.  Although 
yield is the foremost trait, others are also common, including plant 
height, days to flowering or maturity, disease resistance, and 
nutritional value.  AMMI analyses multiple traits one at a time, not all 
together.  Also, when environmental factors such as rainfall or soil 
nitrogen have also been measured (beyond the yield trial itself), this 
additional information can help to interpret AMMI results, although this 
environmental data is not directly incorporated in AMMI analysis.  When 
main and interaction effects are statistically significant and 
agriculturally important, as is most often the case, AMMI is extremely 
useful.  The purpose of AMMISOFT is to make it easy to implement AMMI 
analysis with best practices as described in:  Hugh G. Gauch, Jr., 2013, 
A Simple Protocol for AMMI Analysis of Yield Trials, Crop Science 
53:1860–1869.
	AMMISOFT uses the same format for datasets as did its predecessor 
MATMODEL (except for deletion of the optional format for single-entry 
lines of data).  For all of the following items, enter full lines 
completing everything called for, even if this requires blanks or zeros 
at the end of a line.  If the data were already entered into the computer 
for some other purpose, hopefully little work will be required to prepare 
the file for AMMISOFT.  Data files must be created as plain text files 
and hence their filenames must end with .txt for the extension.  Two or 
three lines precede the data, and they are supplied in the following 
order.


Dataset Name

       The first line of the input data file identifies the dataset.  It 
has two entries.
       (1)	Columns 1–72, an alphanumeric title for the dataset of up to 
72 characters.  This title is reproduced once at the beginning of the 
AMMISOFT output in order to identify or describe your dataset.
       (2)	Columns 77–80, an alphanumeric brief name for the dataset.  
This name is worth choosing carefully because it appears repeatedly in 
the AMMISOFT output file as a concise way to identify your dataset.  A 
useful convention is to use this brief name also in the dataset’s 
filename.  For example, the supplied dataset with the brief name SOYB has 
been given the corresponding filename SOYB.txt.  AMMISOFT automatically 
generates a name for its output file from the name for the input data 
file by adding the suffix “ammi” before the extension, so the result in 
this case is SOYBammi.txt.  An output file is created in the same 
subdirectory as its corresponding input file so that these input and 
output files will appear together in your browser.


Data Information

       The second line of the data file contains thirteen entries.
       (1)	Columns 1–20, an alphanumeric name for the data’s measurement 
and units.  For example, “Yield  kg/ha” is the measurement and units for 
dataset SOYB.
       (2)	Columns 21–25 right justified, a scaling integer.  This entry 
may be a positive or negative integer, or zero.  Ten is raised to the 
power of this integer, and then the data are multiplied by the 
result.  If this entry is 0 (or blank), then no action is taken.  Scaling 
can be useful if the data have been entered already as rather small or 
large numbers, or to avoid having to enter decimal points.  The 
measurement units given in the previous entry should reflect the result 
after multiplication by the indicated scaling factor.
       In order to produce results which print nicely in the print 
formats used by AMMISOFT, it is required that typical data entries be in 
the range of 0.001 to 1000000, or better yet within 0.01 to 100000, or 
ideally within 1 to 10000.  If necessary, the units of measurement should 
be changed in order to result in values in this range.
       (3)	Columns 26–30 right justified, number of genotypes.  For data 
file SOYB, there are 7 genotypes.
       (4)	Columns 32–35 left justified with 1 to 4 characters, brief 
name for genotypes.  As explained soon, three such names are given:  one 
for genotypes, environments, and replications.  The first letter of each 
of these three names must be unique (in columns 32, 42, and 52).  For 
SOYB, the name “GEN” is given for the genotypes.
       (5)	Columns 36–40 right justified, number of environments.  For 
SOYB, there are 10 environments.
       (6)	Columns 42–45 left justified with 1 to 4 characters, brief 
name for environments.  Remember that the first letter of this name in 
column 42 must be unique (not identical to the entry in column 32 or 
52).  For SOYB, the name “ENV” is given for the environments.
       (7)	Columns 46–50 right justified, number of replications.  If 
the data are unreplicated, then this entry should be 1.  If the data are 
unbalanced, with various treatments having various numbers of replicates, 
then this entry should be the largest number of replicates encountered.  
For example, if various treatments have 2 to 4 replicates, then this 
entry should be 4.
       (8)	Columns 52–55 left justified with 1 to 4 columns, brief name 
for replications.  Remember that the first letter of this name in column 
52 must be unique (not identical to the entry in column 32 or 42).  For 
SOYB, this and the previous entry indicate 4 REP for replications. 
	(9)	Columns 58–60, order of data entries.  Subscripts for 
genotypes, environments, and replicates are identified by the first 
letters of their brief names, which are located in columns 32, 42, and 
52.  The order of data entries is specified by listing these subscripts 
according to their rate of change, the first changing fastest and the 
last changing slowest.  If only one replicate is read, replication 
changes most slowly (in fact, never), so it is listed last (in the third 
position; it is not omitted).  For the SOYB data, the first data entry 
2729 is for genotype 1, environment 1, and replicate 1.  The second 
entry, 2662, is for genotype 2, environment 1, and replicate 1.  Hence, 
genotype changes fastest, so it is listed first.  There are 7 
genotypes.  The eighth data entry, 2747, is for genotype 1, environment 
1, and replicate 2, so replicates change second fastest.  There are 
7x4 = 28 entries for the first environment, and the twenty-ninth entry, 
983, begins the data for environment 2, the subscript for environment 
thus changing slowest.  Consequently, the data order specification for 
this dataset is GRE.  Note that the subscript code letters given earlier 
in columns 32, 42, and 52, and the letters given here in columns 58–60 
must match exactly, including case.
       (10)	Columns 62–65 left justified with 1 to 4 characters, brief 
name for treatments.  A treatment is defined as a genotype-and-
environment combination.  The first letter of this name is not required 
to be unique relative to the first letters of the names for genotypes, 
environments, and replications (in columns 32, 42, and 52).  For SOYB, 
this brief name is “TRT.”
       (11)	Columns 68–70 left justified with 1 to 3 characters, 
experimental design.  For SOYB the experimental design is RCB for the 
randomized complete block design.  Likewise, LAT could indicate a lattice 
design, or RAN a completely randomized design.  The one and only 
experimental design that AMMISOFT is designed to recognize and analyze is 
the randomized complete block design, denoted by RCB, and this design 
makes possible calculation of an error mean square to be used for 
significance tests.
       (12)	Columns 71–75 right justified or else including decimal 
point, missing value indicator.  This value must be numeric.  Data 
entries with this value will be marked by AMMISOFT as missing data.  
Provided that no actual observations happen to have a value of zero, the 
missing value indicator may be set to zero in order to mark entries of 
zero as missing observations.  A zero may be entered by blanks in columns 
71–75, but it is better to enter an explicit “0” or “0.0” in order to 
make this entry visible.  Note that a missing value indicator of zero 
causes data entries of zero to be treated as missing values, not as 
actual observations of zero.  If there are no missing data, and 
observations are always positive, then a specification of zero will have 
the intended effect of marking no data as missing.  Likewise, if there 
are no missing data, but some observations are zero although none are 
negative, then a missing value indicator of –1 will have the intended 
effect of marking no data as missing.
       (13)	Column 80, format supplied or not.  If column 80 contains “N” 
(in upper or lower case), then no format is supplied and AMMISOFT reads 
the data in free format.  Free format is suitable if no extraneous 
information is interspersed with the data, if a line break or at least 
one space always separates entries, and if entries of zero are given as 
“0” or equivalent rather than as a blank.  If these conditions are not 
met, enter “F” (in upper or lower case) in column 80 and also supply the 
format, as explained momentarily.
       If no format is supplied, that is if the second line contains “N” 
in column 80, then the following data lines are to be read in free 
format.  Given G genotypes, E environments, and R replications, exactly 
GER entries must follow.  Missing values, if any, are indicated by the 
missing value indicator (specified in columns 71–75 of line 2).  Free 
format allows data entries to appear anywhere on a line, but all entries 
must be separated by a line break or at least one space, and there must 
be no extraneous information, including no commas.


Optional Data Format

       Another line of the input data file is optional, included only if 
the format is supplied, that is, if column 80 of the second input line 
contains “F” rather than “N.”  AMMISOFT uses extremely fast code written 
in FORTRAN to read the data file and to perform AMMI analysis (and 
additional code written in Python to read the output file and to make 
graphs).  This format line contains one item, the supplied FORTRAN format 
in columns 1–72.  Be sure to include the enclosing left and right 
parentheses.  Field specifications for data entries must be real, not 
integer, because these entries will be read as single-precision real 
numbers.  Even if the data entries are typed as integers that are right 
justified in their fields, they must still be read as real numbers.
       The option F is taken (in column 80 of line 2) when the data are 
to be read with a supplied format that uses the FORTRAN rules for a 
format statement.  A supplied format is needed if the data lines contain 
extraneous information interspersed with the data entries, if line breaks 
or spaces do not always separate entries, or if entries of zero are 
indicated by blanks.  Three examples follow of valid format 
specifications for this option F:

             (7F9.2)
             (5F5.0, 10X, F5.0, 15X, 2F5.0)
             (3(10F8.3), /, 4F8.3)

       The first and second examples are rather simple.  The third 
applies to data organized in sets of four lines, with three lines similar 
and the fourth different.  
       Explicit decimal points in data entries override the format 
statement.  For example, the format specifier F5.0 will correctly read 
all of the following fields of 5 characters where “^” is used to indicate 
the presence of a blank column:  ^2.3^, ^1653, 1653., 1.2E3, and  ^^^^5.  
However, 1653^ would not be read as 1653, but rather as 16530.  Values 
entered like integers, without decimal points, must be right justified in 
their fields in order to be read correctly.


Data Entries

       The data entries then follow in the input data file.  Values may 
be positive, negative, or zero, but values equaling the missing value 
indicator will be marked as missing data.  The data are stored in single 
precision, so up to about 7 significant digits can be retained.  For a 
specified format, be sure to enter complete data lines satisfying the 
entire format, even if some entries are zero (regardless whether a zero 
represents an actual observation of zero or else a missing observation).  
For example, in option F with format (4F5.0), given a line containing 
only two actual observations of 2541 and 2619 and two missing 
observations indicated by values of zero, this line must still contain 
the full 20 characters called for by this format, although two of the 
fields (of 5 characters each) may be filled with blanks.
       As noted earlier regarding scaling, in order to produce results 
which print nicely in the print formats used by AMMISOFT, it is required 
that typical data entries be in the range of 0.001 to 1000000, or better 
yet within 0.01 to 100000, or ideally within 1 to 10000.
       Because the order of change of subscripts can be specified, if the 
data have already been entered into the computer for other purposes, the 
data may already be nearly in a suitable format for AMMISOFT.  But if the 
data file contains any extraneous information, such as line numbers or 
code names for anything, a specified format should be used in order to 
ignore this extraneous information.  In unusually complex cases, a small 
computer program may need to be written to transcribe the data into a 
format acceptable to AMMISOFT.


Genotype and Environment Code Names

       Next the input data file contains 4-character code or brief names 
for the genotypes and environments.  The format is 4 characters followed 
by a blank, with 15 entries per line.  The names use alphanumeric 
characters and may contain blanks.  Genotype names are given first, and 
then, beginning on a new line, environment names.  Should the genotypes 
or environments have no particular names or significance, it is still 
necessary to supply these lines, even if this is done by supplying the 
appropriate number of lines merely containing blanks.  For SOYB, the 7 
genotype code names use one line, and the 10 environment code names 
(indicating location-and-year combinations) occur on the following line.


Example

       The following simple example illustrates a correct format to be 
read by AMMISOFT.  It is the supplied data file TOYD.txt that appears on
pages 55 and 86 of my text on AMMI:  Hugh G. Gauch, Jr., 1992, Statistical
Analysis of Regional Yield Trials:  AMMI Analysis of Factorial Designs,
Elsevier.
       A ruler has been placed above this example to facilitate determining
column positions.


         1         2         3         4         5         6         7         8
12345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890123456789012345678901234567890

Toy data, Table 3.1 page 55 in Gauch 1992 Elsevier text on AMMI.            TOYD 
Yield  kg/ha            0    5 GEN     4 ENV     3 REP   RGE TRT   RAN         N
 352 298 331   249 295 251   266 226 219   231 254 196   182 199 216
 268 271 232   253 270 218   243 215 205   199 205 217   234 184 221
 201 170 169   165 214 206   154 206 153   157 176 144   171 159 195
 125 121 102   180 133 158   159 146 124   170 180 139   121 138 164
GEN1 GEN2 GEN3 GEN4 GEN5
ENV1 ENV2 ENV3 ENV4


Two Additional Examples

       Dataset SOYB.txt has data from a New York soybean trial that appears
on page 56 of my text.  Dataset ESW8.txt has an international wheat trial
published in Crossa, Fox, Pfeiffer, Rajaram, and Gauch (1991),
Theoretical and Applied Genetics 81:27–37.  It was also used as the main
example in my 2013 paper on AMMI protocol that was already cited.



